Blake Griffith (wordcount = 938) ## prompt: 

How does Feyerabend construe Galileo's 'Tower Argument', and is he right
to do in this way? What follows from such a reconstruction?  How can it
be resisted?

## essay:

Feyerabend, construes Galileo's Tower Argument in terms of his
principles of proliferation. Feyerabend intends for this reconstruction
to be an example of his anarchist theory of the of progress of science.
However, his reconstruction is exaggerated, and dishonest to Galileo's
intent. Feyerabend exaggerates to the point of dishonesty to make
Galileo seem dishonest. However Galileo did not adhere strictly to
methodological rules, and his methods can be considered justification
for Feyerabend's anarchism, even without Feyerabend's misconstrual of
Galileo's intentions.

Feyerabend defines his proliferation as "introducing, elaborating, and
propagating hypotheses which are inconsistent either with
well-established *theories* or with well-established facts" this is how
Feyerabend believes science is progressed, rather than through
methodological rules. Like Newton, or Descartes would insist. Feyerabend
applies this principle to the Tower Argument which is a dialog between
three fictional characters in which they debate the Copernican versus
Ptolemaic theories of the solar system. The three characters are
Simplicio: an Aristotelian and defender of the Ptolemaic theory,
Salviati: defender of the Copernican theory (Galileo in guise), and
Sagredo: the neutral observer. Feyerabend even suggests that Simplicio's
name is a 'trick', because it implies the supporter of Ptolemaic theory
is a simpleton. While Galileo may or may not have intended to be tricky
here is not important because he is already diverted from any standard
rules of science by trying to make a convincing argument via a
hypothetical dialog. 

Feyerabend begins by introducing the tower argument as Galileo's
'diffusal' of an argument instead of a 'refutation'. Because he is
emphasizing that Galileo did not logically refute the Ptolemaists but
used more subversive methods, like concealment, to win. It also seems to
emphasize that Copernican theory does not have logical, testable, and
indisputable advantages to the Ptolemaic theory, which it does.
Feyerabend intentionally glazes over this fact. So I would say Galileo
does successfully refute the Ptolemaic model in some sense.  

The Tower Argument goes on with Simplicio suggesting that a stationary
earth implies that a stone dropped should be hurtled westward.
Simplicio and Salvatori(Galileo) both agree that this is not what
happens. When a stone is dropped from a tower it falls straight down.
Perpendicular to the earth.  Galileo goes on to show, in terms
understandable by Simplicio, that the Copernican model is also
consistent with this observation. Galileo first explains how the
relative motions of objects can be misunderstood with a metaphor about
how people might think the moon follows them. Feyerabend calls this
impression of the motion of the moon a 'natural interpretation' of its
motion. A natural interpretation is an implicit assumption people make
that is based on previous scientific theory. A natural interpretation is
why an Aristotelian would think the stone would be 'left behind' when
dropped from the tower. Feyerabend asserts that it is difficult to
detect error in natural interpretations without alternative statements,
so Galileo used the Copernican theory to offer an alternative statement.
Galileo, also broke methodological rules when he created an ad hoc
hypotheses to save his theory, since he had no knowledge of Newtonian
mechanics, he made up an explanation to save his theory: Since the earth
is moving, so is the tower, so when the rock is dropped, its motion is
the sum of the two parts, the moving earth and falling.  These two
motions add together so that the rock falls parallel to the tower.  It
is in this way that Feyerabend thinks Galileo is using counterinduction
to elaborate on his theory so that it conforms with the observed facts.
To this Feyerabend remarks that here Galileo does not actually argue,
but uses *propaganda* and *psychological tricks* to persuade Simplicio
and Sagredo.  Feyerabend intends for his reconstruction to demonstrate
the successfulness of his principals of proliferation. By showing how
Galileo used methods other than straight forward arguments to promote
his theory. 

In the tower argument, Feyerabend construes Galileo's arguments as
'propaganda' and 'psychological tricks' These words have negative
connotations. Implying that Galileo would deceive someone into the
belief of a moving earth. There is no reason to believe Galileo was
being deceitful, there was no benefit to his deception. Nor is there a
reason to believe that Galileo did not actually believe in a moving
earth and was lying.  While it can't be ruled out that Galileo was being
dishonest, there is no reason to think he was.

Feyerabend admits, this construal is exaggerated. It portrays Galileo's
intentions dishonestly. By using words like 'propaganda' and
'psychological tricks' he is insinuating that Galileo is trying to
deceive his opponent. The tone implies that Galileo thinks his own
theory is untrue but is promoting it in spite of this fact.  

According to Feyerabend the proliferating scientist should be
"introducing, elaborating, and propagating hypotheses which are
inconsistent [...] with well-established theories." Galileo is indeed
doing this. The idea that the earth moves around the sun was
inconsistent with the churches theory. But Galileo is not proliferating
because the church theory is well established as Feyerabend would have
you think. He is espousing his theory because he thinks that his theory
is correct. How is this different? In the former case Galileo would be
challenging the church just because of the popularity of its theory, in
the latter case Galileo is challenging the church because he simply
believes his theory to be true. Finally we can avoid total anarchism if
we notice, in Galileo's case and others, that scientific rules are
useful.
